# Human Decision Making

A study posted in the Harvard Business Review by Gary Williams and Robert Miller discovered 5 generalized decision making categories that most people slot into, as well as how you can identify and persuade each specific type.

They started by noting the **Charismatic type** - which you can remember as someone who’s easily excited by new big ideas, absorbs large amounts of information rapidly, and tends to process the world visually. These are people who are enthusiastic, captivating, talkative, dominant, and persistent - a type that usually takes responsible risks. The best way to persuade a Charismatic type is by keeping a discussion focused on results, using visual aids, and gaining their emotional commitment by slightly underselling the parts of your proposal that pique their interest the most. (Willams and Miller, 2002) By far the most well-known example of a charismatic is Sir Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group of Companies.

The **Thinker** **type** is the virtual opposite of the Charismatic type, as these are logical people who are only impressed by quantitative arguments that are heavily supported by data. Thinkers tend to be voracious readers and highly cerebral academics that tend to guard their emotions and be more conservative. Thinkers can be “tough nuts to crack”, but you can still persuade them by appealing to their intellect with quantitative data, being transparent about the risks of your proposal, and giving them enough time and space to draw their own conclusions. (Willams and Miller, 2002) The most famous example of the thinker type is Bill Gates, co-founder of Microsoft.

While Thinkers love data, the **Skeptic type **is highly suspicious of all data - especially data that challenges their worldview. You’ll easily identify this type since Skeptics tend to be demanding and disagreeable to the point of rebellious - which goes hand in hand with their tendencies to be self-absorbed, take-charge decision-makers. The only way you stand a chance of persuading a Skeptic is once you’ve built trust and credibility by demonstrating how similar you are to them - and it also helps if your proposal stands to feed their ego by making them look good. (Willams and Miller, 2002) A notable example of a skeptic is Larry Ellison, co-founder of Oracle.

**Followers **are less head-strong than their Skeptic peers, and they usually make decisions based on how they’ve made decisions in the past OR how other trusted peers have made them. Followers are a cautious, risk-averse type that lean heavily on past results. The most effective way to persuade a Follower is making them feel confident by proving that others have succeeded on the same path - social proof is a powerful persuasion tool with the follower type. (Willams and Miller, 2002) A prominent Follower type is Peter Coors, co-founder of Coors Brewing.

Similar to Followers, the **Controller type** is those that hate uncertainty and ambiguity - they are constrained by their fears and insecurities, meaning they focus on pure facts and analytics. Controller types can be identified by their unemotional and sensible demeanor, and they tend to be over-bearing with all the snap judgments they make. You’ll be tasked with overcoming the internal fears of a Controller, so your best bet persuading them is with a credible, linear proposal while giving them space to make a decision. Most importantly, you’re never actually selling to a Controller - you’re letting them make the choice to buy/take the action. (Willams and Miller, 2002) Martha Stewart is a classic example of a Controller type. 

#### Diving Deeper

-  [This article](https://hbr.org/2002/05/change-the-way-you-persuade) allows you to dive deeper into the topic of Decision-Making types
