# Ideation Rules

In the previous topic, we discussed various techniques to let ideas flow. Now, we will discuss the rules that will help to make your ideation sessions more productive.

1. **Go for Quantity: **As we discussed previously, to have some truly innovative ideas, you have to come up with lots of ideas. To put it differently: you need to kiss a lot of frogs to find a prince.
2. **Defer judgement: **During the ideation sessions, the goal is to generate novel ideas that can turn into an innovative solution to the problem you identified. By judging ideas while they are being generated, there is a high chance that people will withhold wild and crazy ideas. Therefore, we recommend separating idea generation from idea selection and creating a nonjudgmental environment that encourages creativity. You will have plenty of time to evaluate, judge, and test later. Think of it like improv theatre. In improv theatre, people perform in front of an audience without ever having practised what they perform. They make it up on the go. The most important rule in improv is to always agree with what the other actors are saying. Never say ‘No’, say ‘Yes, and’. You can think of ideation in a similar way. Never say ‘No, but’, as it stops creativity. Say ‘Yes, and’ to build on other people’s ideas.
3. **Encouraging wild ideas: **First and foremost, these ideas might be the innovative solution you are looking for. Secondly, they serve as mental stimuli to others participating in the ideation. It’s easier to tame a wild and absurd idea into something more plausible than to make a vanilla idea exciting and innovative.
4. **Building on each other's ideas: **As we already saw, great new ideas are two old ideas meeting together for the first time. The act of ideating enables this serendipitous meeting of ideas. So another way of saying “Yes, and” is to take an idea that was just generated and make it better, wilder, and different.
5. **Make Ideas Concrete: **Don’t allow vague or general ideas in your ideation session. If one of your participants offers a vague idea, follow up by asking things like “How can we achieve that?” or “How might that work?”. Make sure the more concrete version of the idea is noted down.
6. **Stay focused on the topic: **Don’t get carried away discussing small details or switching topics. In addition, we recommend allowing one conversation at a time. This way everyone feels included and everyone gets to hear the wild ideas that they can then build off on.
7. **Every Idea Gets Noted Down: **As you are deferring judgement to a later stage, you don’t know yet which idea will be the winner, so you can’t miss out on any of the suggested ideas. Make sure that all ideas are captured at this stage. Another advantage of writing down every idea is that it makes people more creative. If you try to hold an idea in your brain to avoid forgetting it, you have less capacity for exploring new and different ideas. Writing the idea down ensures you don’t have to remember it any more and frees up brain capacity.
8. **Be Visual: **Draw ideas. As the saying goes: a picture tells more than a thousand words. That’s also true in ideation. The visual aspect of your ideas and ideation board will help you and your participants be even more creative.

By following these rules, your ideation session will be more productive. They will yield more creative and original ideas and ensure that everyone gets to contribute.


